[WIP] First split wheel variant PEP (#35)
wheelnext/peps: peps/pep-9999.rst

PEP: 9999
Title: Wheel Variants: Package Format
Author: Jonathan Dekhtiar <jonathan@dekhtiar.com>,
        Michał Górny <mgorny@quansight.com>,
        Konstantin Schütze <konstin@mailbox.org>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>,
        Andrey Talman <atalman@meta.com>,
        Charlie Marsh <charlie@astral.sh>,
        Michael Sarahan <msarahan@gmail.com>,
        Eli Uriegas <eliuriegas@meta.com>,
        Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>,
        Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>,
        Andy R. Terrel <andy.terrel@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 10-Feb-2026
Post-History:

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes variant wheels, an extension to
:doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format` that permits

> building multiple variants of the same package while embedding arbitrary

Reviewer: I'd omit "arbitrary", we have a pretty strict format for properties.

Author: Replacing with "additional".

compatibility data. The specific properties are stored inside the wheel,
and expressed via a human-readable variant label in the filename, which
is then mapped to the actual properties via a separately hosted JSON
mapping. This aims to make ``{tool} install {package}`` capable of

> selecting the most appropriate variant of packages such as PyTorch,

Reviewer: I wouldn't put torch in the abstract, but in the first paragraph of the motivation, it's not a torch proposal, but one very well illustrated by torch and motivated by how many users struggle with torch, and the abstract is generally very high-level.

where additional compatibility dimensions such as GPU support need to be
accounted for.

Motivation
==========

This PEP proposes a way to record arbitrary compatibility data in binary
packages, to allow tools to pick the correct package to use in
situations where
:doc:`packaging:specifications/platform-compatibility-tags` are
insufficient. There are many cases where this is necessary, most notably
in the case of scientific and ML libraries, where high performance
requires extension code that is carefully tailored to the precise
hardware available in the user's environment. Well known examples of
this include:

- PyTorch and other ML tools which depend on the user's GPU details.
- Scientific libraries like SciPy, which can be linked to different
  linear algebra libraries.
- Libraries such as XGBoost that can be linked to different OpenMP
  runtimes.
- Libraries that ship performance enhanced builds which can be used when
  certain CPU instruction sets are available, such as AVX2 or AVX-512.

The problem space has been explored in greater detail in :pep:`817`.

Specification
=============

> Definitions

Reviewer: If we go for shorter PEP, we can omit this section.

Author: Quite a few PEPs include that boilerplate.

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes variant wheels, an extension to
:doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format` that permits
building multiple variants of the same package while embedding
additional compatibility data. The specific properties are stored inside
the wheel, and expressed via a human-readable variant label in the
filename, which is then mapped to the actual properties via a separately
hosted JSON mapping. This aims to make ``{tool} install {package}``
capable of selecting the most appropriate variant of packages where
additional compatibility dimensions such as GPU support need to be
accounted for.

Motivation
==========

This PEP proposes a protocol to record additional compatibility data in
binary packages, to allow tools to pick the correct package to use in
situations where
:doc:`packaging:specifications/platform-compatibility-tags` are
insufficient. There are many cases where this is necessary, most notably
in the case of scientific and machine learning (ML) libraries, where
high performance requires extension code that is carefully tailored to
the precise hardware available in the user's environment. Well known
examples of this include:

> - PyTorch and other ML tools which depend on the user's GPU details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PyTorch and other ML tools which depend on the user's GPU hardware and driver.
```

- Scientific libraries like SciPy, which can be linked to different
  linear algebra libraries.
- Libraries such as XGBoost that can be linked to different OpenMP
  runtimes.
- Libraries that ship performance enhanced builds which can be used when
  certain CPU instruction sets are available, such as AVX2 or AVX-512.

The problem space has been explored in greater detail in :pep:`817`.

Specification
=============

Definitions
-----------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in :rfc:`2119`.

Variant wheel
-------------

A variant wheel is an extension of the wheel format, defined in
:doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format`. A variant
wheel has zero or more `variant properties`_. It MUST specify a `variant
label`_ in the filename, which makes it distinct from non-variant
wheels. It MUST include a `variant metadata`_ file.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A variant wheel is an extension of the wheel format, defined in
:doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format`. It 
MUST specify a `variant label`_ in the filename, which makes it
distinct from non-variant wheels. It MUST include a
`variant metadata`_ file, which maps the variant label to zero or
more `variant properties`_. 
```

Variant properties
------------------

Variant properties express the compatibility of binary packages with
specific platforms, in addition to
:doc:`packaging:specifications/platform-compatibility-tags`. They follow

> a key-value format, whereas a key is called a *variant feature*. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a key-value format, where a key is called a *variant feature*. The
```

keys are further grouped into independently governed *variant
namespaces*. Hence, a variant feature consists of a namespace and a
feature name, whereas a variant property consists of a namespace, a
feature name and a feature value.

Variant properties are serialized into a structured 3-tuple of the
following format::

    {namespace} :: {feature_name} :: {feature_value}

The properties with which the wheel was built are stored within the
wheel, in the `variant metadata`_ file. A variant wheel can specify
multiple values corresponding to a variant feature. For the wheel to be
considered compatible with a system, at least one value for every
feature listed in its properties MUST be compatible with the system.
A variant wheel with zero properties is always deemed compatible.

The namespace and feature name components MUST be non-empty and consist
only of ``0-9``, ``a-z`` and ``_`` ASCII characters (``^[a-z0-9_]+$``).
The feature value MUST be non-empty and consist only of ``0-9``,
``a-z``, ``_`` and ``.`` ASCII Characters (``^[a-z0-9_.]+$``).

The available properties and the rules governing their compatibility
will be defined in a subsequent PEP.

Examples:

.. code:: text

>     # all of the following must be compatible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # the system must be compatible with all of the following
```

or something like that, to explain what we're matching against what

The label ``null`` is reserved and always corresponds to the variant
with zero properties, called a null variant. This variant acts as a
fallback variant that is always compatible.

Examples:

- Non-variant wheel:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64.whl``
- Wheel with variant label ``x86_64_v3``:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl``
- Null variant:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-null.whl``

Variant metadata
----------------

The additional metadata specific to variant wheels is stored inside the
wheel, in ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file, using the JSON format. This
PEP defines the following structure:

.. code:: text

    +- $schema
    +- default-priorities
    |  +- namespace        : list[str]
    |  +- feature
    |     +- {namespace}   : list[str]  = []
    |  +- property
    |     +- {namespace}
    |        +- {feature}  : list[str]  = []
    +- variants
      +- {variant_label}
         +- {namespace}
            +- {feature}   : list[str]  = []

The top-level keys are described in the subsequent sections. Future PEPs
may introduce additional keys and subkeys, therefore the tools MUST

> ignore unknown keys.

Reviewer: Can we allow a `tool` key here for tool-specific metadata before they go into PEPs, or potentially for provider configuration in the future?

Same rules as in `pyproject.toml`, `tool` is a dict for tool use.

Author: That's an interesting idea. Do you happen to know if `tool` is actually standardized anywhere, or a "de facto" standard?

Author: Oh, I see it in pyproject.toml specification.

Schema
''''''

The ``$schema`` key is the standard way of specifying the `JSON schema
<https://json-schema.org/>`__ used. Its value MUST be the URL of a JSON
schema corresponding to this specification, hosted on
``packaging.python.org``. The schema URL will include a version number.
As new keys are introduced, a new version of the schema will be
published, and tools using these keys will be expected to update their

> schema URL. Tools SHOULD verify the validity of the JSON file with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
schema URL. Build backends SHOULD verify the validity of the JSON file with
```

Installers don't need to verify this.

Author: I don't think that's what Jonathan meant here, and I'm not sure about that.

Installers definitely need to account for the possibility that they get a wheel with malformed metadata. One possible way of accounting for that is verifying the metadata against the schema, and rejecting wheels that don't pass.

Build backends on the other hand generally need to emit valid metadata, but I dare say it's not strictly necessary for them to verify it afterwards.

Author: Maybe we should make it "MAY". After all, there is no reason to force a specific verification method.

respect to the ``$schema``.

A proposed JSON schema, corresponding to version ``0.0.1``, is included
in the Appendix of this PEP. Subsequent PEPs changing the metadata
format will include updated versions of the schema.  The schema is
available in :ref:`9999-variant-json-schema`.

Default priorities
''''''''''''''''''

> The ``default-priorities`` dictionary governs the total ordering of variants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``default-priorities`` dictionary defines the ordering of variants.
```

"governs" sounds like a specification doc

The exact algorithm is described in the `Variant ordering`_ section.

The following key is REQUIRED:

- ``namespace: list[str]``: All variant namespaces used in variant
  wheels for a given package version, ordered in decreasing priority.

>   This list MUST not be empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This list MUST contain all namespace used in properties.
```

For the null variant its empty.

Author: It's shared between all variants, so it's not (and I'm pretty sure the current implementation will fail if it is). And I don't think there's really a use case to permit packages building null variants with no other variant defined..

It MAY have the following OPTIONAL keys:

- ``feature: dict[str, list[str]]``: A dictionary with namespaces as
  keys, and ordered list of corresponding feature names as values.
  The feature names are ordered in decreasing priority. It is used to
  override the default feature ordering.

- ``property: dict[str, dict[str, list[str]]]``: A nested dictionary
  with namespaces as first-level keys, feature names as second-level
  keys and ordered lists of corresponding property values as
  second-level values. The feature values are ordered in decreasing
  priority. It is used to override the default value ordering.

Variants
''''''''

The ``variants`` dictionary provides a mapping from variant labels
to variant properties. In the variant wheel, it MUST contain the label
present in that wheel's filename.

> It is a 3-level. The first level keys are variant labels, the second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has 3 levels. The first level keys are variant labels, the second
```

            "level": ["v3"]
          }
        }
      }
    }

Index-level metadata
--------------------

For every package version that includes at least one variant wheel,
there MUST exist a corresponding ``{name}-{version}-variants.json``
file, hosted and served by the package index. The ``{name}`` and
``{version}`` placeholders correspond to the package name and version,
normalized according to the same rules as wheel files, as found in the
:ref:`packaging:wheel-file-name-spec` of the Binary Distribution Format
specification. The link to this file MUST be present on all index pages
where the variant wheels are linked. It is presented in the same simple
repository format as source distribution and wheel links in the index,
including an (OPTIONAL) hash.

This file uses the same structure as `variant metadata`_, except that
the ``variants`` object MUST list all variants available on the package
index for the package version in question. It is RECOMMENDED that tools
enforce the same contents of the ``default-priorities`` for all variants
listed in the file, though careful merging is possible, as long as no
conflicting information is introduced, and the resolution results within

> a subset of variants do not change.

Reviewer: Is there a reason not to force consistency here?

Author: Building additional wheels later. Not that you can reasonably expect to publish them afterwards, but it's a controversial point, so better play it safe.

> 

Reviewer: As an addition to prevent parser differentials:

> Installers and registries MUST verify that the index-level variants file and the variants file in the wheel are consistent

We're leaving "consistent" up to the tools, its definition will grow as PEPs expand wheel variants, but we avoid a situation like with the WHEEL file (https://github.com/pypi/warehouse/pull/19411).

or ``not in`` operator, e.g.:

.. code::

    # satisfied by any "foo :: * :: *" property
    dep1; "foo" in variant_namespaces
    # satisfied by any "foo :: bar :: *" property
    dep2; "foo :: bar" in variant_features
    # satisfied only by "foo :: bar :: baz" property
    dep3; "foo :: bar :: baz" in variant_properties

The ``variant_label`` marker is a plain string:

.. code::

    # satisfied by the variant "foobar"
    dep4; variant_label == "foobar"
    # satisfied by any wheel other other than the null variant
    # (including the non-variant wheel)
    dep5; variant_label != "null"
    # satisfied by the non-variant wheel
    dep6; variant_label == ""

Implementations MUST ignore differences in whitespace while matching the
features and properties.

Variant marker expressions MUST be evaluated against the variant
properties stored in the wheel being installed.

Integration with pylock.toml
----------------------------

Variant wheels can be listed in ``pylock.toml`` file in the same manner
as wheels with different Platform compatibility tags: either all variant
(and non-variant) wheels can be listed, or a subset of them.

> A new ``[packages.veriants-json]`` subtable is added to the file, to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new ``[packages.variants-json]`` subtable is added to the file, to
```

extension sets). To avoid wheel filenames becoming very long, the
property lists are stored inside the wheel and mapped to a short label
that is intended to be human-readable.

To facilitate variant selection while installing from remote index,
the variant metadata is mirrored in a JSON file published on the index.
This enables installers to obtain variant property mapping without
having to fetch individual wheels.

The variant ordering algorithm has been proposed with the assumption
that variant properties take precedence over Platform compatibility
tags, as they are primarily used to express user preferences. This
accounts for possible divergence of platform tags, e.g. because a CUDA
variant may require a different minimal libc version, in which case the
selection should be driven by the desired CUDA preference rather than
incidental platform tag difference.

While the provision of variant properties is deferred to a future PEP to
keep the specification easier to comprehend, a baseline assumption is
made that the compatible properties will be provided in specific order
corresponding to their preference, much like Platform compatibility tags

> are. The variant metadata provides the ability to override this order at

Reviewer: We don't actually have an order for platform compatibility tags, it's just convention.

over non-variant wheel. It can therefore be used to provide a distinct
fallback for the cases of no other variant being supported and variant
wheels being unsupported altogether. For example, PyTorch could provide
a much smaller null variant that is used when no GPU is supported, and a
fallback non-variant wheel built for the default CUDA version.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Variant wheels add an additional `variant label`_ component to the wheel
filename, causing them to be rejected while verifying the filename. This
permits publishing them on an index alongside non-variant wheels,
without risking previous installer versions accidentally installing
them. It was confirmed that the filename validation algorithms in tools
commonly used today reject it:

- If both the build tag and the variant label are present, the filename
  contains too many components. Example:

  .. code-block:: text

     numpy-2.3.2-1-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl
                                                    ^^^^^^^^^^

- If only the variant label is present, the Python tag at third position
  will be misinterpreted as a build number. Since the build number must

>   start with a digit and no Python tags at the time start with digits,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  start with a digit and Python tags do not start with digits,
```

  the filename is considered invalid. Example:

  .. code-block:: text

     numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl
                 ^^^^^

Aside from this explicit incompatibility, the specification makes
minimal and non-intrusive changes to the binary package format. The
`variant metadata`_ is stored in a separate file in the ``.dist-info``
directory. Tools that are not directly concerned with variants need only
to update their filename verification algorithm (if there is one) and
preserve the contents of said directory.

If the new `environment markers`_ are used in wheel dependencies, these
wheels will be incompatible with existing tools. This is a general
problem with the design of environment markers, and not specific to
wheel variants. It is possible to work around this problem by partially
evaluating environment markers at build time, and removing the markers

> or dependencies specific to variant wheels from the non-variant wheel.

Reviewer: I think we need to expand this some more, specifically mentioning that pip backtracks if it encounters an index dependencies with those markers, while URL dependencies fail entirely if they have those markers in `pyproject.toml`. That means an old pip won't fail only because a transitive dependency started using variants, it will just keep you on an old version similar to `requires-python`.

commonly used today reject it:

- If both the build tag and the variant label are present, the filename
  contains too many components. Example:

  .. code-block:: text

     numpy-2.3.2-1-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl
                                                    ^^^^^^^^^^

- If only the variant label is present, the Python tag at third position
  will be misinterpreted as a build number. Since the build number must
  start with a digit and Python tags do not start with digits,
  the filename is considered invalid. Example:

  .. code-block:: text

     numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl
                 ^^^^^

Aside from this explicit incompatibility, the specification makes
minimal and non-intrusive changes to the binary package format. The
`variant metadata`_ is stored in a separate file in the ``.dist-info``
directory. Tools that are not directly concerned with variants need only
to update their filename verification algorithm (if there is one) and
preserve the contents of said directory.

If the new `environment markers`_ are used in wheel dependencies, these
wheels will be incompatible with existing tools. For example, upon

> meeting these tags in a dependency from an index, pip will backtrack and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meeting these markers in a dependency from an index, pip will backtrack and
```

However, the authors decided it safer to break the backwards
compatibility. Additionally, reusing tags posed a potential risk of
wheel labels being incorrectly combined with compressed tag sets. For
example, a ``manylinux_2_27_x86_64.manylinux_2_28_x86_64+x8664v3`` tag
would be incorrectly deemed compatible because of the
``manylinux_2_27_x86_64`` part.

Open Issues
===========

The following problems are deferred to subsequent PEPs:

- governance of variant namespaces
- determining which variant properties are compatible with the system
- building variant wheels

Acknowledgements
================

This work would not have been possible without the contributions and
feedback of many people in the Python packaging community. In
particular, we would like to credit the following individuals for their
help in shaping this PEP (in alphabetical order):

Alban Desmaison, Bradley Dice, Chris Gottbrath, Dmitry Rogozhkin,
Emma Smith, Geoffrey Thomas, Henry Schreiner, Jeff Daily, Jeremy Tanner,
Jithun Nair, Keith Kraus, Leo Fang, Mike McCarty, Nikita Shulga,
Paul Ganssle, Philip Hyunsu Cho, Robert Maynard, Vyas Ramasubramani,
and Zanie Blue.

Change History
==============

> - TBD

Reviewer 2: There's still a TBD here, what should that be?

Reviewer 2: Ah asked that before: it should be a date. Can you add it now? Today's date should be fine I think.

Author: Actually, I've put the creation date here, so it's less confusing.

only of ``0-9``, ``a-z`` and ``_`` ASCII characters (``^[a-z0-9_]+$``).
The feature value MUST be non-empty and consist only of ``0-9``,
``a-z``, ``_`` and ``.`` ASCII Characters (``^[a-z0-9_.]+$``).

The available properties and the rules governing their compatibility
will be defined in a subsequent PEP.

Examples:

.. code:: text

    # the system must be compatible with all of the following
    x86_64 :: level :: v3
    x86_64 :: avx512_bf16 :: on
    nvidia :: cuda_version_lower_bound :: 12.8
    # it must also be compatible with at least one of the following
    nvidia :: sm_arch :: 120_real
    nvidia :: sm_arch :: 110_real

Variant label
-------------

The wheel filename template originally defined by :pep:`427` is changed
to:

.. code:: text

    {distribution}-{version}(-{build tag})?-{python tag}-{abi tag}-{platform tag}(-{variant label})?.whl
                                                                                 +++++++++++++++++++

Variant wheels MUST include the variant label component. Conversely,
wheels without variant label are non-variant wheels. The variant label
MUST consist only of ``0-9``, ``a-z``, ``_`` and ``.`` ASCII characters,

> and be 1-16 characters long (``^[0-9a-z_.]{1,16}$``).

Reviewer 3: It appears like the set of characters here largely removes the normalization requirements we have elsewhere. I'm not sure that it really matters, but should we limit runs of punctuation? That's the only thing that other areas of packaging normalize that is still possible to do with a variant label, and may make it harder to differentiate between two variant labels?

Reviewer: I was wondering the same thing, I mainly didn't comment because I couldn't identify a case where this would cause a problem. As in, people shouldn't start with punctuation, shouldn't stop with punctuation and shouldn't use runs of punctuation, but is that something that every tools needs to have logic to enforce this, or is it enough if reasonable maintainers do it naturally?

Author: I kinda agree with you both. I agree that it would be nice to avoid such names *but* it feels a bit of a stretch to come up with an awfully complex rule to enforce all that. I don't think we can even do it with a single regex, or at least not within what I'd call reasonably readable regex.

Reviewer 3: We could just say what the requirements are, in PEP 503 we just said (of normalization):

> This PEP references the concept of a “normalized” project name. As per [PEP 426](https://peps.python.org/pep-0426/) the only valid characters in a name are the ASCII alphabet, ASCII numbers, ., -, and _. The name should be lowercased with all runs of the characters ., -, or _ replaced with a single - character. This can be implemented in Python with the re module:
> 
> ```python
> import re
> 
> def normalize(name):
>    return re.sub(r"[-_.]+", "-", name).lower()
> ```

Slightly less nice than a single regex, but pretty easy to understand?

Although I think that this regex works for detecting the cases needed ``^[a-z0-9]([a-z0-9]|[_.](?=[a-z0-9])){1,14}[a-z0-9]$`` but I'll leave it up to the reader if that's a reasonably readable regex or not 😅 .

Reviewer 3: ``^([a-z0-9]|(?<=[a-z0-9])[_.](?=[a-z0-9])){1,16}$`` might be more (or less) readable 😅

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't exactly call this readable ... I had to inject it inside https://regex101.com/ to understand it :D 

I don't think the trade-off to "harden the regex" is positive honestly...

Doesn't matter how hard you go ... there's always a way to "obscurify" the name you pick...

<img width="503" height="205" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-18 at 5 31 57 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/67b7db57-06cd-44a5-8508-73cb6a027d02" />

Sooo where do we stop ? Where is too much regex complexity and where it's reasonable ?

If my objective was to create the least readable "variant" I would start by creating a package with the least readable name : https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/name-normalization/#name-format

`^([A-Z0-9]|[A-Z0-9][A-Z0-9._-]*[A-Z0-9])\Z`

I just don't see the point of "us" trying to mitigate that. If they want to make it unreadable ... So be it, they will lose their users and some other product will benefit...

EDIT: maybe I'll concede that starting & finishing by `[a-z0-9]` is probably "reasonable"
`^[a-z0-9][0-9a-z_.]{0,14}[a-z0-9]$`

The label ``null`` is reserved and always corresponds to the variant
with zero properties, called a null variant. This variant acts as a
fallback variant that is always compatible.

Examples:

- Non-variant wheel:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64.whl``
- Wheel with variant label ``x86_64_v3``:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl``
- Null variant:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-null.whl``

Variant metadata
----------------

The additional metadata specific to variant wheels is stored inside the
wheel, in ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file, using the JSON format. This
PEP defines the following structure:

.. code:: text

    +- $schema
    +- default-priorities
    |  +- namespace        : list[str]
    |  +- feature
    |     +- {namespace}   : list[str]  = []
    |  +- property
    |     +- {namespace}
    |        +- {feature}  : list[str]  = []
    +- variants
      +- {variant_label}
         +- {namespace}
            +- {feature}   : list[str]  = []

The top-level keys are described in the subsequent sections. Future PEPs
may introduce additional keys and subkeys, therefore the tools MUST

> ignore unknown keys. The ``tool`` table is reserved for tool-specific

Reviewer 4: This whole phrase about `tool.{project}` needs to go or significantly rephrased (and probably its own paragraph). It's incredibly confusing... 
- We don't understand why it's here. 
- We don't understand the message it tries to add
- We don't understand what's the use

Reviewer 3: The only spec that really allows this tool convention is ``pyproject.toml``, mostly because it's designed as a place for all of the configuration to be able to go for end users. The stuff that goes _into_ a wheel doesn't have it, because it's assumed that everything in a wheel is standardized and every tool can understand it.

> ignore unknown keys. The ``tool`` table is reserved for tool-specific

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ignore variants that contains unknown keys (the version of the `variants.json` should be changed). The ``tool`` table is reserved for tool-specific
```

This is not a good idea.

1. Any change of the structure of the variants.json MUST update the version of the spec
2. Tools must ignore any variant spec version they don't explicitly support
3. We will potentially end up in weird unsupported case where new key `X` is critical and now unsupported.

metadata, with individual tools using ``tool.{project}`` subtables,
where project MUST own the respective PyPI project name.

Schema
''''''

The ``$schema`` key is the standard way of specifying the `JSON schema
<https://json-schema.org/>`__ used. Its value MUST be the URL of a JSON
schema corresponding to this specification, hosted on
``packaging.python.org``. The schema URL will include a version number.
As new keys are introduced, a new version of the schema will be
published, and tools using these keys will be expected to update their
schema URL. The schema can be used to verify the validity of the JSON
file prior to processing it.

> A proposed JSON schema, corresponding to version ``0.0.1``, is included

Reviewer 3: It's a nit, but probably if we're releasing this, the version should be ``1.0.0``? Or maybe ``1.0``? We're going to have to maintain compatibility with this for a long time regardless of what the version is, so the leading 0 feels off to me? But it's a nit either way.

Reviewer: Good point, I'd target 1.0.0 if it's a PEP

Author: It's partial specification. It'll be 1.0.0 in the final PEP.

Reviewer 4: Yes it's on purpose the idea is `Major 0` when the feature is `alpha` - Will be "bumped to `Major 1`" when the feature is stable and complete (after many PEPs).

4. Determine if any of the remaining wheels are variant wheels.
   If not, proceed as with non-variant wheels.
5. If any wheels feature a `variant label`_, download the `index-level
   metadata`_ file, ``{name}-{version}-variants.json``. If this
   file is missing, assume all variant wheels are incompatible and
   proceed as with non-variant wheels.
6. Map the variant labels into sets of variant properties using the
   index-level variant metadata file. If any of the labels present in
   wheel filenames are missing in the file, assume that the respective
   wheels are incompatible.
7. Obtain the ordered lists of compatible variant properties. The
   mechanism for this will be specified in a subsequent PEP.
8. Filter and order variants based on the lists of compatible
   properties, per `variant ordering`_, and select the most preferred
   variant. If no variant wheel matched, use the non-variant wheels by
   their rules.
9. If multiple wheels for a given version share the same variant label,
   order them by Platform compatibility tags and build number, and
   select the best wheel.

Note that steps 4. through 8. are introduced specifically for variant

> wheels. The remaining steps correspond to the current installer

Reviewer 3: I *think* this is wrong? At least I believe ``pip`` does not select a version prior to evaluating the platform tags for a wheel. I'm not sure what ``uv`` does here, but I believe for ``pip`` the order of operations is basically:

1. Query the remote repositories to get a list of wheels for the package.
2. Filter available wheels based on platform compatibility tags (technically they also sort them at this stage too).
3. Select a package version meeting the version constraints.
4. Select the best wheel for that version.

Basically inverting option 2 and 3.

That's not a trivial difference I don't think, because doing them in the order that pip does means the question of "what happens if there are no files for a given version that are supported on this platform" is just sort of implicitly answered-- pip won't even see that as a version that exists to the resolver.

As it stands, with the order of 2/3 in the PEP, it seems to be missing an answer to the question of what should happen if, after selecting a version in (2), all of the wheels are evaluated (both for platform tags and for variants), and there are no wheels compatible with this machine for that version?

Reviewer: This is indeed derived from poetry/uv (that doesn't cover pip)

Reviewer 3: Does poetry/uv just fail if there's a project that only has a linux wheel for the latest release if you're not on linux?

Author: Just to be clear, the algorithm doesn't prohibit backtracking if there's no suitable wheel for a version. We're just trying to keep it simple.

Reviewer: > Does poetry/uv just fail if there's a project that only has a linux wheel for the latest release if you're not on linux?

For uv it depends on mode (pip-like vs. universal) and settings (are there required platforms)

behavior.

Installing a local wheel
''''''''''''''''''''''''

When asked to install a local wheel file, the proposed behavior would be
to:

1. If no variant label is present in the filename, proceed as with
   non-variant wheels.
2. Verify the wheel compatibility via Platform compatibility tags.
3. Read the `variant metadata`_ from ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` inside
   the wheel file.
4. Obtain the ordered lists of compatible variant properties. The
   mechanism for this will be specified in a subsequent PEP.
5. Verify the wheel compatibility via compatible properties.

Publishing variant wheels on an index
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Variant wheels are uploaded to an index just like regular wheels.
There are two possible approaches to publishing the index-level
``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file for every package version:
it can either be prepared and uploaded by the user, or it can be
generated automatically by the index.

> The file should not be changed once it is published, as clients may have

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The file SHOULD not be changed once it is published, as clients may have
```

Author: Actually, "NOT" should be uppercase too. I'll fix that.

Author: Oh wait, that's non-normative part. We don't use RFC vocab here.

already cached it or locked to the existing hash. For this reason, if

> the index is responsible for generating the file, it should use some

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the index is responsible for generating the file, it SHOULD use some
```

> mechanism to defer publishing it until the release is fully uploaded

Reviewer 3: Even with PEP 694 there's not really a concept on PyPI of a release being "fully uploaded". You can come back a year later and release a new wheel for an existing release (maybe to support new hardware, or a new Python version, etc).

I don't think it's workable to say that the contents of this file cannot change-- unless we require it to come from users-- but even then it feels wrong to say it can't change? We have caching on `/simple/` today without requiring things not change, the HTTP caching semantics deal with that in a reasonable-ish way.

Reviewer: I pushed for this being kinda immutable for client reasons, but I'm find for skipping this part. Until Upload API 2.0 ships the whole uploading story even without variants can't be fixed :/

Author: It's non-normative section, so it doesn't have to be 100% possible right now.

into :doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format` and
other PyPA specifications. Teaching variants to end users will be
covered in a subsequent PEP, as user experience details are addressed.

Reference Implementation
========================

The `variantlib <https://github.com/wheelnext/variantlib>`__ project
contains a reference implementation of a complete variant wheel
solution. It is compliant with this PEP, but also goes beyond it,
providing example solutions to `open issues`_.

A client for installing variant wheels is implemented in a
`uv branch <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/pull/12203>`__.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Predictable variant labels
--------------------------

The specification proposes that variant labels are arbitrary, and
variant properties are mapped to them via a `variant metadata`_ file
rather than expressed directly in them. While it could be technically
possible to create variant labels from variant properties, this would
either require permitting very long filenames that will cause issues
with some platforms, or imposing arbitrary limits on variant property
counts, making the specification less suitable for addressing

> multidimensional compatibility matrices.

Reviewer 3: It might be good to mention the "just generate a hash" option as well, and exclude it for producing variant labels that are difficult to read or reason about.

Author: Good idea. I've added a paragraph to the PEP.
